Mitigating Large Language Model Context Drift via

Holographic Invariant Storage

Arsenios Scrivens

February 5, 2026

Abstract

Scaling towards autonomous deployment has been a key goal of Large Language Mod-
els. However, “Agent Drift” has caused critical issues and reliability failure. Adherence to

constraints within LLM context windows over extended interaction sequences causes initial
instructions, objective functions, and safety constraints to significantly diverge from their
original state. In this report, we introduce Vector Symbolic Architectures (VSA) and a

neuro-symbolic memory system, dubbed Holographic Invariant Storage (HIS), which en-
codes the existing safety mechanisms and rules into high-dimensional vectors of dimension

D = 10, 000, called hypervectors. Due to the nature of high-dimensionality, the encoded

rules are now mathematically orthogonal to the noise of the context window. Modern prob-
abilistic attention mechanisms do not utilize systems like this because of fundamentally

different mathematical principles, with VSAs using algebraic operations on vectors and

probability-driven machines using softmax-based weighting. To prove that safety can in-
deed be enforced as a deterministic structural constant, we established a fidelity aligning to

the (theoretical) geometric bound: 1/
√
2. Through Monte Carlo simulations (of n = 1000),
even under direct adversarial attacks on those safety constraints, we have proven that we
can recover the original safety rules and core objectives of the system with a mean fidelity
of 0.7074 (σ = 0.0039), which aligns with the geometric bound.

1 Introduction

One of Generative AI’s structural bottlenecks is the inability to keep goal and objective coher-
ence over long-horizon tasks. Transformers accomplish great feats when faced with in-context

learning, but they suffer from degradation with longer context windows. Referred to as “struc-
tural entropy”, or drift, it is the probability of adherence to the original system prompt degrading

as the context window fills with interaction history [3].
Autonomous agents face the worst consequences of this problem. Behavioral drift can lead

to logic regression, which in turn increases susceptibility to “jailbreak” attacks. The atten-
tion mechanism itself causes this fundamental limitation. The agent probabilistically weighs

safety constraints against immediate context, comparing its core rules like any standard token
sequence. This means that the safety constraints are being treated just like incoming text,

whether that text contradicts the safety constraints or not. This phenomenon is only exacer-
bated by the “Lost in the Middle” effect [4], where LLMs retrieve information more effectively

if found at the beginning or end of their input context, but struggle to retrieve content found
in the middle, resulting in degraded retrieval accuracy.
To properly address this issue, we propose that the agent’s core identity should no longer

be attached to its active context window. We accomplish this by using Holographic Invari-
ant Storage (HIS). Drawing on the properties of Hyperdimensional Computing (HDC), HIS

1

creates immutable memory substrates that are resilient to noise, corruption, and degradation
by utilizing distributed representations [1].
2 Methodology
2.1 Vector Symbolic Architecture (VSA)
We use 10,000-dimensional bipolar hypervectors (v ∈ {−1, 1}

10,000) to represent semantic con-
cepts. VSA’s innate algebraic properties allow us to manipulate these concepts [1, 2]:

• Binding (⊗): This special operator allows us to combine two vectors, such as a Key and a
Value, into a single, new vector that retains both vectors’ information while simultaneously
being distinct from them. This allows for efficient representation of composite information.
• Bundling/Superposition (+): This simple summation operator enables us to create
one vector from several. Doing this preserves the underlying signal of multiple context
states, even in the presence of noise.
• Unbinding (⊗−1

): This is simply the inverse of binding. This operator allows us to
recover one of the original two bound vectors that formed the binding vector, as long as
we know the other original bound vector. Unbinding extracts the original value from a
corrupted, noisy, or bundled state.
2.2 The Restoration Protocol
To create the agent’s encoded safety constraint, dubbed the ”System Invariant” (Hinv), we bind
the semantic idea of constraints (Goal Key: Kgoal), or other goals, with the actual constraint
itself (Safe Value: Vsafe).

Hinv = Kgoal ⊗ Vsafe (1)
Drift states result from the invariant being subjected to additive noise from user interactions
(Ncontext) over time during the operation and lifetime of the agent. In order to address this
properly, we unbind the drifted state with the original key (Kgoal) through the restoration
protocol.
A critical prerequisite to ensuring geometric bounding is that the system ensures the
context noise is normalized before it handles superposition. This is established as ∥Ncontext∥ ≈
∥Hinv∥. Without any active normalization, the fidelity of recovery would degrade as the context
noise accumulates (i.e. context drift).

Vrecovered ≈ sign(Hinv + Ncontext) ⊗ Kgoal (2)
High-dimensional noise vectors are intrinsically statistically orthogonal to the key. Because

of this, the unbinding operation does not remove the interference directly, but instead dis-
tributes it across the hyperspace. In addition to that, the orthogonalization process allows

the original safety vector to be recovered via a simple similarity search. This effectively filters
out the noise, producing a near-zero dot product with the signal.
3 Empirical Results
3.1 Monte Carlo Simulation
We conducted a Monte Carlo simulation (n = 1, 000) in order to validate the robustness of this
protocol. We utilized a semantic encoder and in each trial, we corrupted the invariant anchor

2

with variable amounts of noise. The unique, adversarial noise strings are comprised of prompt
injection attacks, random data flooding, and vast blocks of neutral text.
Statistical Results:
• Mean Recovery Fidelity: 0.7074
• Standard Deviation (σ): 0.0039

Figure 1: Distribution of Holographic Recovery Fidelity (n = 1, 000). The line of normal
fit (μ = 0.7074) and the theoretical geometric bound (1/
√
2 ≈ 0.7071) are represented in the
graph above by a black curve and a straight, red-dashed line, respectively. The graph indicates
a precise alignment of the experimental data to the geometric bound. This suggests that the
underlying mechanism is successfully functioning as a deterministic, geometric filter.

The low standard deviation indicates that the mechanism’s performance is stable and inde-
pendent of the specific semantic content of the attack.

3.2 The Geometric Bound

We were able to establish a very close alignment of our empirical mean of 0.7074 to the theoret-
ical expectation of recovering a signal from a superposition of two orthogonal vectors of equal

magnitude (Signal + Noise). We can define this theoretical expectation as the expected cosine
similarity of 1/
√
N, where N = 2.

Similarity ≈
1
√
2
≈ 0.7071 (3)
The HIS mechanism is successfully able to isolate the safety signal from the noise floor, with
predictable precision. This means HIS serves as a geometric filter due to the two values being
closely aligned.
3.3 Adversarial Resistance
In order to test the system properly, we experimented with three distinct attack vectors:

1. Information Flooding: We used large amounts of html code taken from random web-
sites.

3

2. Direct Jailbreak: We gave simple 1-sentence instructions that would violate safety rules.
3. Neutral Noise: We provided large amounts of text from the book, ”Moby Dick” via the
Gutenberg Project.

(a) Information Flooding (b) Direct Jailbreak (c) Neutral Noise
Figure 2: Aetheris // Anti-Drift Kernel Interface. The red (or lack thereof) in the first
bar represents the Drifted States. The green bar below it represents the Restored States. Even
though we had notable variance within each Drifted State (ranging from -0.02 to 0.16), the
Holographic Restored State consistently converged to the theoretical geometric bound (≈ 0.71).
This effectively prevents the attack’s semantic content from influencing the agent.
In every single case, fidelity of > .70 was restored for the safety vector.
4 Conclusion
Holographic Invariant Storage demonstrably mitigates the Context Drift of LLMs, managing
to achieve a mean signal restoration of ≈ 0.71 against all adversarial attacks experimented
with. Successful encoding of safety constraints as geometric invariants makes this possible.
As documented in recent industry analyses, modern architecture goal coherence degradation
has caused an immediate safety crisis, presenting as severe architectural drift and vulnerable,
autonomous coding task generation [5]. Our findings suggest that future AI safety architectures
should consider integrating VSA-based memory kernels to maintain goal coherence indefinitely.
References

[1] Kanerva, P. (2009). “Hyperdimensional Computing: An Introduction to Computing in Dis-
tributed Representation with High-Dimensional Random Vectors.” Cognitive Computation,

1(2), 139-159.
[2] Gayler, R. W. (2003). “Vector Symbolic Architectures Answer Jackendoff’s Challenges for
Cognitive Neuroscience.” ICCS/ASCS International Conference on Cognitive Science, 133-
138.

[3] LeCun, Y. (2022). “A Path Towards Autonomous Machine Intelligence.” OpenReview, Ver-
sion 0.9.2.

[4] Liu, N. F., et al. (2024). “Lost in the Middle: How Language Models Use Long Contexts.”
Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 12, 157-173.

4

[5] OX Security. (2025). “Army of Juniors: The AI Code Security Crisis.” OX Security
Whitepaper, October 2025. https://www.ox.security/wp-content/uploads/2025/10/
Army-of-Juniors-The-AI-Code-Security-Crisis.pdf